Bacteria are the oldest
living organisms on the earth.
They've been here for billions of years,
and what they are are single-celled
microscopic organisms.
So they're one cell
and they have this special property
that they only have one piece of DNA.
So they have very few genes
and genetic information
to encode all of the traits
that they carry out.
And the way bacteria make a living
is that they consume nutrients
from the environment,
they grow to twice their size,
they cut themselves down in the middle,
and one cell becomes two,
and so on and so on.
They just grow and divide and grow
and divide -- so a kind of boring life,
except that what I would argue
is that you have an amazing interaction
with these critters.
I know you guys think
of yourself as humans,
and this is sort of how I think of you.
This man is supposed to represent
a generic human being,
and all of the circles in that man
are all the cells that make up your body.
There's about a trillion human cells
that make each one of us who we are
and able to do all the things that we do.
But you have 10 trillion
bacterial cells in you or on you
at any moment in your life.
So, 10 times more bacterial cells
than human cells on a human being.
And, of course, it's the DNA that counts,
so here's all the A, T, Gs and Cs
that make up your genetic code
and give you all
your charming characteristics.
You have about 30,000 genes.
Well, it turns out you have
100 times more bacterial genes
playing a role in you
or on you all of your life.
So at the best, you're 10 percent human;
more likely, about one percent human,
depending on which
of these metrics you like.
I know you think of yourself
as human beings,
but I think of you as
90 or 99 percent bacterial.
(Laughter)
And these bacteria are not passive riders.
These are incredibly important;
they keep us alive.
They cover us in an invisible body armor
that keeps environmental insults out
so that we stay healthy.
They digest our food,
they make our vitamins,
they actually educate your immune system
to keep bad microbes out.
So they do all these amazing things
that help us and are vital
for keeping us alive,
and they never get any press for that.
But they get a lot of press because
they do a lot of terrible things as well.
So there's all kinds
of bacteria on the earth
that have no business being
in you or on you at any time,
and if they are,
they make you incredibly sick.
And so the question for my lab
is whether you want to think about
all the good things that bacteria do
or all the bad things that bacteria do.
The question we had is:
How could they do anything at all?
I mean, they're incredibly small.
You have to have a microscope to see one.
They live this sort of boring life
where they grow and divide,
and they've always been considered
to be these asocial, reclusive organisms.
And so it seemed to us
that they're just too small
to have an impact on the environment
if they simply act as individuals.
So we wanted to think if there couldn't be
a different way that bacteria live.
And the clue to this came
from another marine bacterium,
and it's a bacterium
called "Vibrio fischeri."
What you're looking at on this slide
is just a person from my lab
holding a flask of a liquid
culture of a bacterium,
a harmless, beautiful bacterium
that comes from the ocean,
named Vibrio fischeri.
And this bacterium has the special
property that it makes light,
so it makes bioluminescence,
like fireflies make light.
We're not doing anything
to the cells here,
we just took the picture
by turning the lights off in the room,
and this is what we see.
And what's actually interesting to us
was not that the bacteria made light
but when the bacteria made light.
What we noticed
is when the bacteria were alone,
so when they were in dilute suspension,
they made no light.
But when they grew
to a certain cell number,
all the bacteria turned on light
simultaneously.
So the question that we had is:
How can bacteria,
these primitive organisms,
tell the difference
from times when they're alone
and times when they're in a community,
and then all do something together?
And what we figured out is that the way
they do that is they talk to each other,
and they talk with a chemical language.
So this is now supposed
to be my bacterial cell.
When it's alone,
it doesn't make any light.
But what it does do is to make
and secrete small molecules
that you can think of like hormones,
and these are the red triangles.
And when the bacteria are alone,
the molecules just float away,
and so, no light.
But when the bacteria grow and double
and they're all participating
in making these molecules,
the molecule, the extracellular
amount of that molecule,
increases in proportion to cell number.
And when the molecule
hits a certain amount
that tells the bacteria
how many neighbors there are,
they recognize that molecule
and all of the bacteria
turn on light in synchrony.
And so that's how bioluminescence works --
they're talking with these chemical words.
The reason Vibrio fischeri is doing that
comes from the biology --
again, another plug
for the animals in the ocean.
Vibrio fischeri lives in this squid.
What you're looking at
is the Hawaiian bobtail squid.
It's been turned on its back,
and what I hope you can see
are these two glowing lobes.
These house the Vibrio fischeri cells.
They live in there, at high cell number.
That molecule is there,
and they're making light.
And the reason the squid is willing
to put up with these shenanigans
is because it wants that light.
The way that this symbiosis works
is that this little squid lives
just off the coast of Hawaii,
just in sort of shallow knee-deep water.
And the squid is nocturnal,
so during the day, it buries itself
in the sand and sleeps.
But then at night,
it has to come out to hunt.
So on bright nights
when there's lots
of starlight or moonlight,
that light can penetrate the depth
of the water the squid lives in,
since it's just in those
couple feet of water.
What the squid has developed is a shutter
that can open and close
over the specialized light organ
housing the bacteria.
And then it has detectors on its back
so it can sense how much starlight
or moonlight is hitting its back.
And it opens and closes the shutter
so the amount of light
coming out of the bottom,
which is made by the bacterium,
exactly matches how much light
hits the squid's back,
so the squid doesn't make a shadow.
So it actually uses the light
from the bacteria
to counter-illuminate itself
in an antipredation device,
so predators can't see its shadow,
calculate its trajectory and eat it.
So this is like the stealth
bomber of the ocean.
(Laughter)
But then if you think about it,
this squid has this terrible problem,
because it's got this dying,
thick culture of bacteria,
and it can't sustain that.
And so what happens is,
every morning when the sun comes up,
the squid goes back to sleep,
it buries itself in the sand,
and it's got a pump that's attached
to its circadian rhythm.
And when the sun comes up, it pumps out,
like, 95 percent of the bacteria.
So now the bacteria are dilute,
that little hormone molecule is gone,
so they're not making light.
But, of course, the squid doesn't care,
it's asleep in the sand.
And as the day goes by,
the bacteria double,
they release the molecule,
and then light comes on at night,
exactly when the squid wants it.
So first, we figured out
how this bacterium does this,
but then we brought the tools
of molecular biology to this
to figure out, really,
what's the mechanism.
And what we found -- so this is now
supposed to be my bacterial cell --
is that Vibrio fischeri has a protein.
That's the red box --
it's an enzyme that makes
that little hormone molecule,
the red triangle.
And then as the cells grow,
they're all releasing that molecule
into the environment,
so there's lots of molecule there.
And the bacteria also have
a receptor on their cell surface
that fits like a lock and key
with that molecule.
These are just like the receptors
on the surfaces of your cells.
So when the molecule increases
to a certain amount,
which says something
about the number of cells,
it locks down into that receptor
and information comes into the cells
that tells the cells to turn on
this collective behavior of making light.
Why this is interesting
is because in the past decade,
we have found that this
is not just some anomaly
of this ridiculous, glow-in-the-dark
bacterium that lives in the ocean --
all bacteria have systems like this.
So now what we understand is that all
bacteria can talk to each other.
They make chemical words,
they recognize those words,
and they turn on group behaviors
that are only successful when
all of the cells participate in unison.
So now we have a fancy name for this:
we call it "quorum sensing."
They vote with these chemical votes,
the vote gets counted,
and then everybody responds to the vote.
What's important for today's talk
is we know there are hundreds of behaviors
that bacteria carry out
in these collective fashions.
But the one that's probably
the most important to you is virulence.
It's not like a couple bacteria get in you
and start secreting some toxins --
you're enormous; that would have
no effect on you, you're huge.
But what they do, we now understand,
is they get in you, they wait,
they start growing,
they count themselves
with these little molecules,
and they recognize when they have
the right cell number
that if all of the bacteria launch
their virulence attack together,
they're going to be successful
at overcoming an enormous host.
So bacteria always control
pathogenicity with quorum sensing.
So that's how it works.
We also then went to look
at what are these molecules.
These were the red triangles
on my slides before.
This is the Vibrio fischeri molecule.
This is the word that it talks with.
And then we started
to look at other bacteria,
and these are just a smattering
of the molecules that we've discovered.
What I hope you can see
is that the molecules are related.
The left-hand part
of the molecule is identical
in every single species of bacteria.
But the right-hand part of the molecule
is a little bit different
in every single species.
What that does is to confer exquisite
species specificities to these languages.
So each molecule
fits into its partner receptor
and no other.
So these are private,
secret conversations.
These conversations
are for intraspecies communication.
Each bacteria uses a particular
molecule that's its language
that allows it to count its own siblings.
Once we got that far,
we thought we were starting to understand
that bacteria have these social behaviors.
But what we were really thinking
about is that most of the time,
bacteria don't live by themselves,
they live in incredible mixtures,
with hundreds or thousands
of other species of bacteria.
And that's depicted on this slide.
This is your skin.
So this is just a picture --
a micrograph of your skin.
Anywhere on your body,
it looks pretty much like this.
What I hope you can see
is that there's all kinds
of bacteria there.
And so we started to think, if this
really is about communication in bacteria,
and it's about counting your neighbors,
it's not enough to be able
to only talk within your species.
There has to be a way to take a census
of the rest of the bacteria
in the population.
So we went back to molecular biology
and started studying different bacteria.
And what we've found now is that,
in fact, bacteria are multilingual.
They all have a species-specific system,
they have a molecule that says "me."
But then running in parallel
to that is a second system
that we've discovered, that's generic.
So they have a second enzyme
that makes a second signal,
and it has its own receptor,
and this molecule
is the trade language of bacteria.
It's used by all different bacteria,
and it's the language
of interspecies communication.
What happens is that bacteria
are able to count
how many of "me" and how many of "you."
And they take that information inside,
and they decide what tasks to carry out
depending on who's in the minority
and who's in the majority
of any given population.
Then, again, we turned to chemistry,
and we figured out
what this generic molecule is --
that was the pink ovals
on my last slide, this is it.
It's a very small, five-carbon molecule.
And what the important thing
is that we learned
is that every bacterium
has exactly the same enzyme
and makes exactly the same molecule.
So they're all using this molecule
for interspecies communication.
This is the bacterial Esperanto.
(Laughter)
So once we got that far,
we started to learn that bacteria
can talk to each other
with this chemical language.
But we started to think
that maybe there is something practical
that we can do here as well.
I've told you that bacteria
have all these social behaviors,
that they communicate
with these molecules.
Of course, I've also told you
that one of the important things they do
is to initiate pathogenicity
using quorum sensing.
So we thought:
What if we made these bacteria
so they can't talk or they can't hear?
Couldn't these be
new kinds of antibiotics?
And of course, you've just heard
and you already know
that we're running out of antibiotics.
Bacteria are incredibly
multi-drug-resistant right now,
and that's because all of the antibiotics
that we use kill bacteria.
They either pop the bacterial membrane,
they make the bacterium
so it can't replicate its DNA.
We kill bacteria
with traditional antibiotics,
and that selects for resistant mutants.
And so now, of course,
we have this global problem
in infectious diseases.
So we thought, what if we could
sort of do behavior modifications,
just make these bacteria
so they can't talk, they can't count,
and they don't know to launch virulence?
So that's exactly what we've done,
and we've sort of taken two strategies.
The first one is, we've targeted
the intraspecies communication system.
So we made molecules that look kind
of like the real molecules, which you saw,
but they're a little bit different.
And so they lock into those receptors,
and they jam recognition
of the real thing.
So by targeting the red system,
what we are able to do is make
species-specific, or disease-specific,
anti-quorum-sensing molecules.
We've also done the same thing
with the pink system.
We've taken that universal molecule
and turned it around a little bit
so that we've made antagonists
of the interspecies communication system.
The hope is that these will be used
as broad-spectrum antibiotics
that work against all bacteria.
And so to finish,
I'll show you the strategy.
In this one, I'm just using
the interspecies molecule,
but the logic is exactly the same.
So what you know is that when
that bacterium gets into the animal --
in this case, a mouse --
it doesn't initiate virulence right away.
It gets in, it starts growing,
it starts secreting
its quorum-sensing molecules.
It recognizes when it has enough bacteria
that now they're going
to launch their attack,
and the animal dies.
And so what we've been able to do
is to give these virulent infections,
but we give them in conjunction
with our anti-quorum-sensing molecules.
So these are molecules that look
kind of like the real thing,
but they're a little different,
which I've depicted on this slide.
What we now know is that if we treat
the animal with a pathogenic bacterium --
a multi-drug-resistant
pathogenic bacterium --
in the same time we give
our anti-quorum-sensing molecule,
in fact, the animal lives.
And so we think that this
is the next generation of antibiotics,
and it's going to get us
around, at least initially,
this big problem of resistance.
What I hope you think is that bacteria
can talk to each other,
they use chemicals as their words,
they have an incredibly
complicated chemical lexicon
that we're just now
starting to learn about.
Of course, what that allows bacteria to do
is to be multicellular.
So in the spirit of TED,
they're doing things together
because it makes a difference.
What happens is that bacteria
have these collective behaviors,
and they can carry out tasks
that they could never accomplish
if they simply acted as individuals.
What I would hope that I could
further argue to you
is that this is the invention
of multicellularity.
Bacteria have been on the earth
for billions of years;
humans, couple hundred thousand.
So we think bacteria made the rules
for how multicellular organization works.
And we think by studying bacteria,
we're going to be able to have insight
about multicellularity in the human body.
So we know that the principles
and the rules,
if we can figure them out
in these sort of primitive organisms,
the hope is that they will be applied
to other human diseases
and human behaviors as well.
I hope that what you've learned
is that bacteria can distinguish
self from other.
So by using these two molecules,
they can say "me" and they can say "you."
And again, of course, that's what we do,
both in a molecular way,
and also in an outward way,
but I think about the molecular stuff.
This is exactly what happens in your body.
It's not like your heart cells and kidney
cells get all mixed up every day,
and that's because there's all
of this chemistry going on,
these molecules that say
who each of these groups of cells is
and what their tasks should be.
So again, we think bacteria invented that,
and you've just evolved
a few more bells and whistles,
but all of the ideas are in these simple
systems that we can study.
And the final thing is, just to reiterate
that there's this practical part,
and so we've made these
anti-quorum-sensing molecules
that are being developed
as new kinds of therapeutics.
But then, to finish with a plug
for all the good and miraculous bacteria
that live on the earth,
we've also made
pro-quorum-sensing molecules.
So we've targeted those systems
to make the molecules work better.
So remember, you have
these 10 times or more bacterial cells
in you or on you, keeping you healthy.
What we're also trying to do
is to beef up the conversation
of the bacteria that live
as mutualists with you,
in the hopes of making you more healthy,
making those conversations better,
so bacteria can do things
that we want them to do
better than they would be on their own.
Finally, I wanted to show you --
this is my gang at Princeton, New Jersey.
Everything I told you about
was discovered by someone in that picture.
And I hope when you learn things,
like about how the natural world works --
I just want to say that whenever you
read something in the newspaper
or you hear some talk about something
ridiculous in the natural world,
it was done by a child.
So science is done by that demographic.
All of those people
are between 20 and 30 years old,
and they are the engine that drives
scientific discovery in this country.
And it's a really lucky
demographic to work with.
(Applause)
I keep getting older and older,
and they're always the same age.
And it's just a crazy, delightful job.
And I want to thank you
for inviting me here,
it's a big treat for me to get to come
to this conference.
(Applause)
Thanks.